# City of Houston, City Controller 2016 Audit Plan
This is a website version of the City of Houston Controller's Office FY2016 Audit Plan. You can view the original document as a PDF <a href="http://www.houstontx.gov/controller/audit/2016-01.pdf">here</a>.

# BACKGROUND AND AUTHORITY –
The City Controller is an independently elected official who is granted authority through the Article VIII of the City Charter. Article VIII, Section 7, Audits, requires the City Controller to “.... be responsible for conducting internal audits, in accordance with professionally recognized auditing standards, of the operations of all City departments, offices, agencies and programs. The scope of internal auditing shall encompass an objective and systematic examination of evidence to provide an independent assessment of the efficiency and effectiveness of the city's system of internal controls and the quality of performance based on quantifiable criteria in meeting objectives....”. The City Controller assigns this responsibility to the City Auditor (through appointment) to be the executive in charge of the Audit Division, whose scope of work is contained under a separate Charter (Audit Division Charter). Audit results are issued to the Mayor, City Council Members and Department Directors.

# AUDIT DIVISION ORGANIZATION –
At the end of FY2015, the Audit Division had a total headcount of 10, consisting of 8 professional audit staff, one support staff, and the City Auditor. Audit Division staff provide audit related services as their primary focus. Additional training, certifications, and experience will enhance staff ability to provide services.
The Controller’s Office utilizes internal and external audit resources to execute our mission and objectives and meet the needs and requests of our varied stakeholders. We currently have 8 professional service firms under contracts which will expire March 15, 2016.

# APPROACH AND METHODOLOGY –
The Audit Division adheres to: 1) the Government Auditing Standards (GAS – commonly referred to as the “Yellowbook”) as promulgated by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) and 2) the International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing as issued by the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA – known as the “Redbook”). To assure compliance with these professional standards, the Audit Division undergoes a peer review every 3 years. The most recent peer review was completed November 1, 2013.1

The Annual Audit Plan is a flexible commitment of the Audit Division within the Office of the City Controller which establishes areas that will be prioritized for audits in accordance with the responsibility and authority identified in the City Charter. The Audit Plan, approved by the City Controller, serves as a working document that considers items such as; the Enterprise Risk Assessment (ERA), input from the Mayor, City Council, Department Management, and results from previous audits. Due to continual requests for audit services, the increasing demand for non-audit services, and the required testing for planned activities, the Audit Plan will be monitored and revised as necessary throughout the year.
The professional standards noted previously require that the Audit Plan be grounded in risk- based methodology. An Enterprise Risk Assessment (ERA) is conducted annually on selected Departments on a rotational basis for efficiency and to ensure full coverage of all City Departments over a 4-5 year period.

Evaluation of these factors provides indicators for prioritizing potential projects for the upcoming year. In other words, this points us in the direction of “what” to audit. We then identify the available resources to determine the volume of activity to include in our plan (see Audit Resource Allocation section below).
